libredo is a simple library that makes it easy to add powerful undo
and redo commands to a logic puzzle game (or similar type of program).
Many such programs that provide undo and redo commands will remember
undone states only while a user is using these two commands. Once the
user uses some other command that changes state in a new way, all of
the undone states are forgotten. This limited functionality is common,
if not ubiquitous. I would like to see more programs offer something
better: that is what this library is provided for.

The file Documentation.txt describes what libredo can do and how the
API is used. There is also an example program included
(sokoban-example) which provides a demonstration of the API's
capabilities and how to use it.

These programs are copyright (C) 2013 by Brian Raiter. These programs
are free software; you can redistribute them and/or modify them under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your
option) any later version. These programs are distributed in the hope
that they will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the
implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License, included in this
distribution in the file COPYING, for more details.

Bug reports and general feedback should be directed to the author at
<breadbox@muppetlabs.com>. If you use this library in your own code,
consider dropping me a line to let me know. (You should also let me
know if you tried to use this library in your code, but it didn't do
what you needed!)

Happy coding.


Brian Raiter
<http://www.muppetlabs.com/~breadbox/software/libredo.html>
